committed relationship we also heard in
the tributes today from one of major
general jeffrey's good friends
and also his granddaughter take a listen
by any measure michael jeffrey was an
exceptional australian
and an outstanding leader
many people talk about giving public
service
of serving the people michael never
talked about it
he lived it breathed it
and simply did it without seeking
accolades for his work
and he continued to do so pro bono
until a few months before his death
for his entire life he devoted himself
to serving australia
and its citizens as the soldier
the state governor the governor general
and lastly is the soil advocate of
australia
he wasn't driven by the many accolades
that he received over his life
it was his family his friends his
country
and taking care of the planet and all of
those who live on it
that motivated him to undertake the
countless pursuits that he did
he often said that if at the end of your
life you could count yourself to have
five
good friends then it was a life well
left
major general michael jeffrey was 83 he
leaves behind his wife marlena
their four children and their seven
grandchildren
stephanie boris joining us there live
from parliament house
european union ambassadors have
unanimously
approved a post-brexit trade deal with
the united kingdom
the agreement which has taken four years
to draft still needs approval from the
european parliament
britain is expected to approve it on
wednesday the agreement allows for
tariff
and quota free trade between the uk and
eu
and will come into effect on the 1st of
january
a prominent saudi activist who
campaigned for women's rights
to drive has been sentenced to almost
six years jail lujan al-hatlul
has already spent two years in detention
a saudi court has now found her guilty
on a number of charges
including trying to change government
laws and serving foreign interests
absolutely shocking to see the saudi
authorities conviction
and sentencing of legend today on
under the terrorism law what they have
done is to
now state to the world that they
consider women's rights activism
to be an act of terrorism
a chinese citizen journalist who
documented the chaos in wuhan
at the height of the coronavirus
outbreak has been jailed for
four years zhang jian traveled to the
virus epicenter in
february posting videos on social media
from crowded hospitals the 37 year old
was arrested in may for spreading false
information and has been on a hunger
strike for several months
a shanghai court has now found her
guilty of
picking quarrels and provoking trouble a
frequent charge against
activists in china
u.s president-elect joe biden says his
transition team
is not getting top-level cooperation
from the trump administration
in key national security errors mr biden
says many u.s
national security agencies have been
damaged and hollowed out by the current
administration
he says his team has encountered
obstruction from the political
leadership
of key departments including defense
we need to make sure that nothing is
lost in the handoff between
administrations
my team needs a clear picture of our
forced posture around the world
and our operations to deter
enemies we need full visibility into the
budget planning underway
at the defense department and other
agencies in order to avoid any window of
confusion
or catch up that our adversaries may try
to exploit
but as i said from the beginning we have
encountered
roadblocks from the political leadership
at the department of defense
and the office of management and budget
right now
we just aren't getting all the
information that we need
for the ongoing outgoing and from the
outgoing administration
in key national security areas it's
nothing short in my view of
irresponsibility finance
news now and david chow has joined me
and david what's happening with
bitcoin prices well it's pretty crazy
selena over the weekend the price of
bitcoin the digital currency
went past 28 000 us dollars it's a
record high so in australian dollars
that's about 36
800 and it's uh i guess when you look
back one of the best performing assets
uh compared to everything else certainly
better than the share market property
market and all the mainstream things
people invest in
so its rise has been quite remarkable or
insane depending on your risk appetite
uh so partly the reason for the run-up
in bitcoin prices
uh the covert 19 pandemic i guess as uh
economies stimulate uh their economies
pumping more cash into the economy
i guess a lot of skeptics have been
investing in alternative currencies
as a hedge uh you know against uh you
know more stimulus into the economy so
we've got a guest to talk more about
bitcoin today so from the independent
reserve a cryptocurrency exchange in
sydney we've got
adrian schwozni adrian thanks for
joining us
it's my pleasure david so since you're
in the business of bitcoin and
cryptocurrency
tell us uh in your view why is the price
of bitcoin risen so much this year
yeah it's been an incredible year um i
guess from our perspective it was
probably the busiest year that we've had
at independent reserve since about 2017
since the last
big bull run that we had and i think a
large
reason for this as you alluded to
earlier is
the quantitative easings that have been
happening around the world a lot of
governments have been
printing a lot of money and you know
it's been hard to get returns
in traditional investments and you know
like the more
i guess normal asset classes haven't
been producing
you know any any returns at all um so
i guess a lot of investors have been
looking for a hedge against inflation
they've been looking for
a safe haven asset that can't be
arbitrarily inflated by government can't
be manipulated
and cryptocurrencies uh presents
a really attractive option for that
um so what we've seen over the last year
is a lot of
you know much larger more sophisticated
investors
enter this space we've seen a lot of
hedge funds
uh really begin to allocate into this
area we've seen some
large companies allocate to this and
we're also seeing a lot of banks
entering this area as well so i think
it's really
a sign of the growing maturity of the
industry
and it's really becoming seen as a you
know more
more accepted asset class and you know
it's like just one of those things that
you would hold
in a portfolio
[Music]
so what do you think is different about
this time i mean back in
december 2017 bitcoin prices surged to
20 000 us dollars which was a record
high at the time but then within two
months its value
crashed uh big time and then in january
2019 it went below
three and a half thousand us dollars so
is this time any different
yeah so i guess the last big boom it was
very much retail driven so we saw a lot
of
retail interest you know like i remember
my cab driver was
trying to tell me to buy some bitcoin
and
that was really a sign that you know we
had a big retail driven boom whereas i
think right now it's
more institutionally focused and also
you know the infrastructure in the in
the in the industry is
a lot more mature so i guess all the
companies that were around back in 2017
have had
three and a half years to really mature
and improve their infrastructure and
improve their governance
so i would expect this boom to be a lot
more sustainable than the last
when there are those who are incredibly
skeptical about bitcoin they say
it's not a reliable source of value
which a currency has got to be
uh bitcoin's just incredibly volatile i
mean one day might surge
a hundred percent it could plunge by 50
hypothetically
so that could make it tough for people
to budget especially if they're trying
to buy
mundane things like milk or electronics
or anything really
yeah so i think what we're seeing is a
shift from
the way bitcoin is being viewed by
investors so i guess
you know initially the promise of
bitcoin was
peer-to-peer electronic cash it was
meant to
be cash for the internet and be used
to make normal everyday payments and it
hasn't really matured in that way it's
matured more as a store of value
more as something more like a gold i
suppose
um and as it matures and as its market
cap increases
we're seeing volatility decrease uh so
you know when it was in its infancy you
know 2011 2012 the volatility was
actually much much higher because the
market cap was a lot lower
so it was much easier you know for any
large player to really move the price
and as the market cap increases it it
takes
a lot more you know a much larger
investor
to be able to move the price so we're
going to see volatility decrease over
the next
year or two i think as the market cap
increases and
it'll become less of a risky investment
but it is still very very volatile of
course
adrian schwarzenegger thank you very
much for your insights it's my pleasure
all right so that was adrian
schwarzenegger the ceo of independent
reserve which is a cryptocurrency
exchange
on the crazy rise of bitcoin this year
selena yeah david um how's the rest of
the market looking today
well nowhere near as bullish but still a
pretty decent day
i mean the australian share market has
given up some of its early gains but
it's still
uh in decent gains territory so i guess
over the last month it's really been
boosted by covert vaccine optimism and
over the weekend what we had was uh us
president donald trump not acting on his
threat to veto a trillion dollar
stimulus spill so he actually went ahead
and signed it and that's what's
boosted markets today and when we take a
look at the
asx and how it's going uh the all lords
and the asx 200 have risen now about
half a percent
earlier today it was up almost one
percent pretty much every sector is
trading higher
and there's a lot of optimism as you can
see uh your travel stocks like flight
center are doing
very well now when we take a look at
uh us markets overnight uh there was
some strong gains for the dow jones
which went up more than 200 points
and the s p and nasdaq also put on
decent gains so
the u.s market is now at a record high
once again
and in commodities the price of gold has
edged up to 1880 us dollars an ounce
while oil prices are looking mixed with
west texas crude down to 47.5 us dollars
per barrel
and in currencies the australian dollar
has edged up very slightly
to almost 76 u.s cents although it's a
bit weaker compared to last week
the local currency is still near a two
and a half year high
and selena that's the latest in finance
news thanks very much david
now let's take a look at the national
weather for you brisbane partly cloudy
today
showers across sydney there'll be a
possible shower for canberra melbourne
will be mostly sunny today
partly cloudy for hobart and adelaide
perth will be very hot and mostly sunny
showers with a possible thunderstorm in
darwin
[Music]
[Applause]
the top stories here on abc news
three new cases of covert 19 were
detected in new south wales
in the 24 hours to 8 pm last night all
of them directly linked to the avalon
cluster
three additional cases were detected
after the 8 pm deadline
one from wollongong one from sydney's
inner west and one from the northern
suburbs of sydney
all three cases are under investigation
to determine the source of infection
anyone with symptoms is urged to get
tested immediately
meanwhile the immigration minister has
pledged to identify temporary visa
holders
involved in breaching public health
orders for potential deportation
newly sworn in minister alex hawk says
he was shocked by the scenes of revelry
at bronte beach on christmas day and
that the migration act
allows him to cancel or revoke the visa
of anyone threatening
public health a major five-year study of
the atlantic ocean has discovered
12 previously unknown species using
remote-controlled deep sea robots
the project studied the ocean and its
hidden ecosystems in
unprecedented detail it also found that
life in the deep ocean
is under threat by climate change
and india is closing in on victory
against australia on the fourth day of
the boxing day test
at the mcg australia has given up three
of its four wickets for just 52
additional runs
short time ago australia was nine for
with a lead of 59 runs
more now on the coronavirus outbreak in
new south wales and contact tracers
are trying to determine the source of
three new infections
outside of the northern beaches area the
cases were picked up
after yesterday's reporting period had
finished
we had over 16 000 people come forward
and get
tested but we're really keen to elevate
those testing numbers overnight to 8 pm
we had three cases all of which are
directly linked
to the avalon cluster all of which are
already in isolation
which is positive news however overnight
since 8 pm we have had a couple of cases
where we haven't yet established those
links to the avalon cluster they're
cases outside
of the northern beaches one of which is
from wollongong
so i'm not ruling out that they're
somehow not linked to the avalon cluster
that case from wollongong had been in
sydney
however until those links are
established all of us in greater sydney
have to be on high alert including
residents of wollongong
so i say that in order to encourage as
many people as possible across the state
even if you live in the regions even if
you live in greater sydney if you have
the modest of symptoms please come
forward and get tested
because we know how contagious this
virus is
and now that we've had a couple of cases
come in since 8 p.m
outside of the northern beaches that's
always a cause for concern
and validates the advice the health
experts have given have been giving
government
backpackers are being warned their visas
could be cancelled
if they break covert 19 rules police
have been called to break up
large gatherings along sydney's eastern
beaches
and at byron bay for more federal
immigration minister alec hawke
joins us now minister thank you very
much for your time on abc news
what powers does the commonwealth have
to act against backpackers that are
caught
breaking public health orders
yeah well thanks helena under the
migration act the federal government has
powers to review and cancel
visas for people who are threatening
public health and safety
and visitors to australia need to be
very clear that if they breach public
health orders they are threatening the
health and safety of australians
and the federal government will look at
their visas i understand like many
others you were disturbed by the
pictures
of the gathering at bronte beach on
christmas day
talk us through um these actions that
you're taking now are they exceptional
or are you really enforcing what's
already there
well like all australians i think 10
months into this pandemic
we're quite shocked to see people have
been here a while now
who've seen the situation around the
world who understand the the state of
the world and what we're in
uh breaching public health orders when
we have an outbreak in sydney
and we want to thank the people on the
northern beaches the australians who are
doing the right thing
most australians are doing the right
thing most temporary visa holders are
doing the right thing
but there is a small number of visa
holders who are doing the wrong thing
and 10 months into this pandemic that is
unacceptable
so i've asked the department of home
affairs to bring forward
any cases working with the new south
wales police and new south wales
agencies
that they're aware of of people who've
breached their visa conditions
and we will examine those visas and we
will cancel them where necessary
are you going to be looking in
particular at the incident that happened
on christmas day
or is this a warning for anything that
might happen over the new year period
well in the lead up to new years it'll
be absolutely clear
you must obey the public health orders
if you're a temporary visa holder
you're a guest in australia and we know
most temporary visa holders
do obey the public health orders but for
that small group that think that they
can breach them
and get away with it we have asked our
agencies to look into it we
will ask them to work with new south
wales officials and if we become aware
that you've breached a public health
order
we will look at your visa conditions
very very carefully and you are subject
to cancellation
so again we urge people to do the right
thing we don't want to be canceling
visas in fact most temporary visa
holders have done the right thing
however if this people continue to do
the wrong thing
and breach public health orders we will
take action with our powers under the
migration act
so will police be reviewing that footage
then
of bronte beach that incident or going
back over their records from that and
passing that on to home affairs
well i've asked the department of home
affairs to work with the new south wales
police and state agencies
and they will do that and again we if we
become aware
of people who have breached their visa
conditions and threatened the public
health and safety of others
we will take action under the migration
act and i think people expect us to do
that
10 months into this pandemic people
understand what is happening people
understand what we need to be doing
we've done so well as a country we're
urging people to do the right things for
people that don't now
when they know the rules and they
understand what's at stake
that is a threat to public health and
safety we know that
airlines aren't operating at their full
capacity
if someone was identified i guess how
about
how does this deportation process come
given the the current state and wouldn't
it be better perhaps to have
increased fines for uh temporary visa
holders
well there are plenty of options in
terms of conditions and and dealing with
people
on temporary visas we have routinely
continued to deport people throughout
the pandemic and that's a function of
the federal government
we'll keep doing that where necessary
but again if people do the right thing
there'll be no need for this and people
just need to remember
if you're a temporary visa holder if
you're a guest in australia you must
obey the public health order
it's pretty simple and i think people
will get that message pretty clearly
but for those that don't the small
minority that think that they are above
the system
of course we have the power to cancel
your visa and we'll consider that very
carefully if we become aware that you've
breached your visa conditions
have there been people deported during
the pandemic
that have breached covert restrictions
yet
well people are routinely deported for
all sorts of things if you uh breach
your visa conditions
uh if you are a criminal of course we
have criminal deportations
and we do have the power to cancel visas
under under the covert
uh requirements with breaching the
public health and safety of australians
so we will do that and we will act where
necessary and
i mean this does seem to be an issue
that
is is a concern in that eastern suburbs
area where there are a lot of
backpackers temporary visa holders
up uh towards byron bay again um
they're kind of seen as the party
central for young people who
are in australia and uh traveling around
have measures been put in place to try
and get the message
to those young people about the
restrictions that exist here
in australia at the moment
well certainly we've got uh temporary
visa holders and guests
all around australia and most of them i
want to stress again have been really
good
in the last 10 months and they've abided
by their visa conditions
they've been working hard or they've
been studying or they've continued
to do the right thing we do have a small
group of people who are breaching
their conditions certainly in sydney
there we have seen some breaches
recently
and in other places 10 months in i think
australians expect
that their government will act and we
will act if people continue to breach
their conditions and risk public health
and safety
and we couldn't be more clear about that
the message is clear
people know there's a pandemic on they
know that in their home countries many
of them are in a
worse state than australia and they know
that here the hard work and sacrifice of
australians and our guests
has meant we're in a good position for
new years where people can celebrate at
home
with small groups of guests inside the
public health orders
so please just do that and if you do the
right thing you have nothing to worry
about but if people continue to breach
their visa conditions the federal
government will have no choice but to
act
immigration minister alex hawk i do
thank you very much for joining us on
abc news
thanks elena mapping the surface of mars
is easier than mapping the deep sea
floors of the earth's oceans
but that hasn't stopped a team of
researchers from doing just
that in the atlantic ocean scientists
with the atlas project have spent the
last five years
using remote controlled robots to
explore the deep sea floor of the ocean
where they discovered species previously
unknown to science
a major part of their mission was to
predict future challenges to these
ecosystems
in the face of climate change murray
roberts is professor of applied marine
biology and ecology
at the university of edinburgh and
coordinator of the atlas study thank you
very much for joining us on
abc news can you tell me what was the
purpose talk us through that purpose of
atlas
so atlas was a project in the north
atlantic ocean
and it teamed up scientists from canada
the united
states and right across europe to work
together on better understanding
deep sea atlantic ecosystems and we
chose to focus on deep sea atlantic
ecosystems
because they're really at the forefront
of human activities these days as people
explore for oil and gas in deeper waters
people look for fish
in the deep sea but also the deep ocean
is changing
thanks to the many effects of climate
change so the oceans are getting warmer
about 90 percent of global heating has
actually warmed the sea
and about 30 percent of the carbon
dioxide re-released
has dissolved in the oceans and that's
pushing the oceans into a more acidic
condition than they've ever been in the
past
tell us how these deep sea robots that
you use
for this actually work so some of them
are tethered to the surface we call
those remotely operated vehicles
they have cameras you're actually seeing
video at the moment from one of these
remote vehicles
cameras and lights illuminate the scene
but also they have manipulator arms
little robot arms
the scientists on board can then use
those to carefully take samples
or to put out experiments and make
measurements in the deep ocean
so they truly are the hands and the eyes
of scientists
in the deep sea and they allow us to
study leave equipment in place
and understand these environments and
that was what atlas was really all about
it was about understanding how these
places tick and how they
might change in the future and you
discovered some new species
we did yes so we've discovered 12 new
species there's some corals
there's some animals called bryozoans
strange colonial animals
we've also discovered uh some some sea
urc
some sea shells mollusks as well so
there's been quite a variety of species
about 12 described
30 species found in new places and this
really just shows how little we know
about the deep ocean
how much there is still to learn can you
explain to us
what you discovered in relation to
acidification
yeah for sure so that acidification
signal
is actually really bad news at depth
because in the deeper ocean
the water is already slightly closer
many deep sea corals are built from
calcium carbonate and as the sea water
becomes slightly more acidic
that calcium carbonate starts to erode
and dissolve away
so that's attacking the very foundations
of huge
deep sea coral reefs that have formed
over hundreds of thousands of years
the atlantic ocean has been historically
one of the best places in the world
to be a deep sea coral but if the
predictions are right and
atlas did a lot of work in this area the
predictions are showing the suitability
of the habitats
really collapsing over the next hundred
years if we stay on the emissions
trajectories that we're currently on
what are the next steps for the project
so atlas has wrapped up but we're really
excited to have launched a new project
it's called i
atlantic and that brings together
europeans and canadians and americans
once again
but we're also working with south
africans brazilians and argentinians
so embracing this approach and then
expanding it to the south atlantic so
we're really excited to have launched
that project
and that will take us through until 2023
professor murray roberts i do thank you
very much for your time
on abc news thank you
well mango season is well underway
across australia with farm workers on
track
to pick 7.5 million trays
while a labor shortage has plagued the
agricultural industry this year
in central queensland researchers are
one step closer to finding a solution
for mango mango growers at least ian
groves is a yapoon based
mango farmer trialling a new auto
harvester being developed at central
queensland university
and he joins me now thanks very much for
your time
ian uh talk us through what this new
harvester the one you've been trialling
how's it been performing uh well it's
very early days serena the
the university and kerry walsh that
professor kerry
have been working on for about three
years and done some trial picks with it
it's still yet to be placed onto a
commercial
uh platform so at the moment it's
basically a set of arms that go
pick the mango uh turn it over and then
bring it back and drop it into a pool of
water which is you know we
that's that's how we do sap mangoes in
the field so it's the business end of
what will be put on to a commercial
harvester in the next couple of years to
make it
make it a real goal and are you just one
of the properties that have been
trialling this
uh i think he's had to go in a couple
other places but we're
quite close to the university so he he
um he
comes out here at his leisure to uh to
to give it a run
and uh when they've made a few
modifications they
they come back and give it another go so
it's um
it's a fairly technical piece of
equipment where the cameras
have to recognize the mango see how far
it is away from
from the harvester reach out grab it
turn it
and get hold of it properly turn it over
there's some footage there i believe of
it grabbing twisting over
and then bringing it back to drop it
into the uh into the
water collection area so there's a fair
bit of technology involved
and uh you know once they get that part
perfectly timed we'll be able to put on
a commercial machine
what would that mean for a business like
yours to be how
able to have a machine like this
uh well certainly um you know it is a
little way off getting
fully going but uh you know labor is
is a constant issue you know we've got a
good
group of uh pickers and packers here
right now but we only just have enough
and and some of them
we're interrupting you obviously on on
another busy day there just how busy
is your operation at the moment i mean i
like many australians love my mangoes
and
certainly they've been on the dinner
table over over christmas and there's
been trays in the supermarkets
um what's what's business been like for
you at the moment in terms of harvesting
yeah so we're right in the peak of the
mangoes at the moment we like to
challenge ourselves we're packing
lychees as well at the same time so we
have about 30 odd people
on the farm currently working and uh
um it's it is our peak time and of
course around christmas gets a little
tricky with
days that we have to not you know we
can't work so
um it's always busy now uh the weather's
been
good kind to us it's overcast a little
drizzle this morning we're forecasting
rain and
rain stops playing unfortunately it's a
little bit like the cricket
so so uh you know normal pressures are
on about trying to get the volume off
and off the market so um but it's been
going well so far
ian i've got to ask you this do you love
your mangoes or do you get a little
tired of them after a while
no no no you never get tired of mangoes
they're um
they're they're they're one of one of
the gifts that we have
to uh for taste sensation and and you
know one of those things in life that's
always enjoyable
uh indeed they are ian groves from
yapoon thank you very much
for joining us on abc news we really
appreciate your time and interrupting
you during your harvest
no problem i thought you thank you
a young dancer from canberra is poised
to receive
world-class training with the
prestigious queensland ballet
samuel holmes has spent most of the year
training in a small space at home
because of covert 19 restrictions but
he's ready to leap into 2021
after making it through the rigorous
audition process
years of hard work and dedication are
starting to pay off for
13 year old sam my sister was already
doing it
when i was when i got into it so i just
went to watch some of the
classes and then i just really enjoyed
it so i gave it a go
he was five when he took up ballet and
nine when he joined the australian
ballet's youth program
soon he'll get world-class training at
both the joffrey ballet school
in new york and the queensland ballet
ballet's been really good
and it's something that i definitely
want to do
it's fun but you have to focus a lot
that focus is 10 hours of training over
four days
every week it's good for like discipline
and resilience and all that
so being able to like dealing with no
we're like not good enough all of that
stuff yeah his confidence has grown
a lot it's really brought him out of
himself
sam's love for movement was obvious even
before he took his first
steps my daughter was already dancing
when sam was born so i used to wheel him
in in the pram
and then you know as soon as he could
sit up he would sit
on the edge of the class and he'd sort
of bop along with the music
so then as soon as he was able to stand
up and walk he was in there
and luckily for the future dancer a
kenai teacher spotted his talent
one of his teachers said i want that boy
doing ballet
and he resisted for a little while and
then he got into it and
just loved it but it takes more than a
love of the medium to succeed
sam's got just a little spark in him
that just draws everybody in and he's a
delight to watch
after a year confined to the act next
year will bring
lots of interstate travel for his family
but mum jane says
it's worth it they get so much more than
just the ability to dance from it it's
friendships it's
connection and a whole lot of pride jana
black
abc news canberra
time now to talk sport and australia has
built a small lead over india at the mcg
abc sports simon smale joins me now and
simon cameron green and pat cummins
were not out overnight but they couldn't
survive the new ball
that's right celine a bit of a
disappointing morning for australia on
the back of a pretty disappointing day
yesterday you're right cameron greene
and pat cummins really held all of the
hopes of australia this morning but they
fell
um shortly after the new ball was taken
the second new ball um pat cummings was
the first
four for 22 103 balls he lasted which is
is a fair dig um he had a pretty good
innings in the second innings
last time we played india two years ago
as well that ended a 57-run partnership
and gave australia a lead of just 25
runs cam greenville
fell shortly after for 45
that put australia again in real hot
bother with just
the bowlers left to face the onslaught
of the indian attack
mitch dark survived a review for both
leg before and caught behind
on nine but nathan lyon was out very
shortly being caught behind
but for three off mohammed siraj who's
been hugely impressive for india
so far in this test this is only his
debut performance as well in an indian
test team so very impressive from him
but at the moment nine for 197 so
australia edging towards
breaking the 200 mark for the first time
in this series
in an innings a lead of 66 runs josh
hazelwood on nine
and mitchell stark on 12 last time i
checked so
um they're taking an extra half hour
before lunch because
australia are in pretty close to
losing their final wicket of the innings
a lot's been made of cameron green
hasn't it as the
new all-rounder what did you think of
him
i thought he was very impressive again
selena he really did look to play his
shots he
had to dig in a fair bit this is a very
low scoring test in fact it's been a
very low scoring series so far
after 80 overs australia were just 149
and that's the lowest
in a test match since 1989 for australia
so
it hasn't been particularly high scoring
where he did play his shots hit a number
of lovely strokes towards boundary and
it was a really good partnership with
pat cummins
and he probably had to change his
mindset slightly when
cummings departed but nevertheless could
only
manage to pick out um ravindra jeju just
he's the only player on the leg side
when he got
when he found him and picked him out
there so hugely disappointing way for
his innings to end and 45
perhaps not but he's been put in under
pretty serious uh
pretty seriously difficult situations
this is just his second test this is his
third innings batting for australia
as the all-rounder he's come in at 424
in the first test
he came in at four for 98 in the first
innings in melbourne
four for 65 here in the second inning so
he's done incredibly well really to
start to craft a bit of a inning start
to craft a bit of a partnership
with those around him and he's got a
bright future still only 21 for west
australian so
a lot to come from cameron green yes now
india has a small target to chase down
i guess the big question is can
australia stop them
well that is the big question and of
course everything
very fresh in our minds being that 36
all
out in adelaide that was only a couple
of weeks ago and those mental scars will
surely be evident for india but i just
can't see lightning striking twice
they looked far more assured with the
bat this time around india and
the 36 all out in adelaide it seemed to
be a bit of a consequence of every
single ball that beat the edge
actually taking a little bit of a nick
on its way through that doesn't happen
very often it's uh once in a
once in a hundred inning type scenario
and i can see india just
calmly knocking the runs over but i've
got to get australia out first and
the more that australia can pile on
every run
so crucial here in this little spell
just before lunch if they can get a
little bit more of a total
up and make it even closer to 80 that'd
be that would be pretty impressive and
pretty tough for india to have to deal
with
simon smale from abc sport thanks very
much for the chat
no problem time to check the weather now
with nate byrne
thunderstorm activity has been causing
plenty of cloud through northern and
eastern australia
and it's likely to stay the same today
we'll see more wet and stormy weather
because
on the synoptics not much is moving that
front that moves through the southeast
is stalled
leaving a trough laying over the country
that's really not going to move much at
all
in the west the trough there dragging
more heat down into the southwest of wa
that's ramping up the fire danger as
well as the temperatures
so severe conditions for large parts of
the west of wa
but it's all going to be about that wet
and stormy weather continuing through
northern and eastern australia with the
likelihood of more severe
cells that could bring heavy rainfall
that could lead to some flash flooding
for parts of the northern territory
queensland and in new south wales around
the ranges as well today
the south looking fairly clear now this
picture really doesn't change much in
the coming days lots more storm activity
for the north we'll see another burst of
wet weather developing through the east
as
the humidity starts to pick up that'll
move down into victoria as well
but the southwest of the country looking
relatively settled for the most part
for your wednesday we've got a couple of
showers around for brisbane a top of 27
degrees a possible shower in sydney as
well 25 degrees there
cloudy and 25 for canberra 23 in
melbourne you've got a fine day a couple
of showers developing for hobart it's
aiming for 21
28 in adelaide another very hot day for
perth a hitting
39 again and for darwin some showers
possibly with the storm
maximum of 32. and that's abc news for
the moment i'm selena edmonds
coming up here on abc news channel the
latest on today's top stories
including threats to cancel the visas of
backpackers
who break coronavirus restrictions
thanks very much for your company
[Music]
[Applause]
i just can't take my eyes i just can't
take my eyes i just can't take my eyes
off
of you it's the way that i feel
when i'm looking at you doing the things
that you do
you're mad i'm mad you're mad
we're all mad good evening and welcome
to news at six
last thing i need right now is to get
involved with a married woman i've got
my reputation to think of
what do you know about what i want to
achieve let's just pretend that we live
in the real world where else would you
rather be it's jack
[Music]
jack
anywhere anytime a summer of
entertainment awaits
on abc eye view
[Music]
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you're clean squeaky i
decided to stand up last night and i'll
continue to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef
[Music]
[Applause]
your summertime streaming is on abc eye
view
quite serious situation that we're
worried about stay connected with the
abc listen app
get the latest local news and updates
from your region
we're going to stay with you so that
you're well informed
download the abc listen app and stay
connected
we are one but
we are many
and from all the lands on earth we
call we share a dream
we are
[Music]
today new south wales residents urged to
get tested
after three mystery cases are detected
outside the northern beaches
until those links are established all of
us in greater sydney have to be on high
alert including residents of wollongong
backpackers put on notice the
immigration minister
threatens to deport tourists caught
flouting clovered restrictions
[Music]
secrets of the deep new species
discovered in the depths of the atlantic
ocean
and australia's hopes of winning the
boxing day test fading fast
as india's bowling attack rips through
the bottom order
hello and welcome to abc news i'm selena
edmonds
three new cases of covert 19 have been
detected in new south wales
all of them directly linked to the
avalon cluster that shut down sydney's
northern beaches
but authorities have revealed three more
cases were picked up last night
after yesterday's reporting period had
finished reporter ashley raper has more
from sydney
there's both good and bad news that's
come from the premier's briefing that
wrapped up
a short time ago we'll start with the
good news that there were just three new
cases recorded in the past
24 hour period and they were all linked
to the avalon cluster so that is
positive news in terms of the lockdown
on the northern beaches and and how the
strategy that the government has been
employing that it seems at this stage to
be working and that
downward trend in cases especially
connected to that avalon cluster is
continuing but
since the cut-off they have new cases
have come to light three new cases in
fact and one
case is in a person from wollongong
another from the inner west and one from
the northern suburbs of sydney and at
this stage they cannot link them
to the avalon cluster now the person in
wollongong had been
to sydney so the government says that
now contact tracers are talking to them
they're trying to get all their
information they can from these new
infections and but it does suggest
that the virus is out there and it means
the premier wants everybody in greater
sydney to be on high alert
overnight since 8 pm we have had a
couple of cases
where we haven't yet established those
links to the avalon cluster they're
cases outside
of the northern beaches one of which is
from wollongong
so i'm not ruling out that they're
somehow not linked to the avalon cluster
that case from wollongong had been in
sydney
however until those links are
established all of us in greater sydney
have to be on high alert including
residents of wollongong
ash what have authorities had to say
about the testing numbers today
yes they are very concerned about the
testing rates that have been dropping
off there was
just over 16 000 tests done in the past
24 hours and
the chief medical officer here at new
south wales dr kerry chan said
usually she'd be happy with that they
always want them at least over 15
000 but we're in a different ball game
at the moment
and they want those testing numbers to
be increased to
at least 30 000 per day now we did see
lots of people in the lead up to
christmas
when the outbreak was first alerted
around that avalon cluster there were up
to 60
000 people getting tested a day and now
authorities are
making a plea for people to come forward
because they do have to make decisions
about what they do with the northern
beaches lockdown
and what they do with the rest of
greater sydney especially seeing that
there's these mystery cases popped up
and they can't have confidence in the
data in the numbers
if they don't have high levels of
testing so dr kerry
chan has made a plea for people to come
forward and get testing tested
rather even with the mildest of symptoms
no matter what symptoms however mild
please present for testing
whilst the six whilst many weeks ago i
would have been happy with 16
329 tests in a in a 24 hour period
for me now i'd want to see those numbers
pushed back pish pushed up well over the
to 30 000 by having those really high
rates of testing
for those people that have got symptoms
that will give us the great assurance
we're not missing those transmission
events particularly outside that's
northern beaches
area backpackers are being warned their
visas could be cancelled if they break
covert 19 rules
police have been called to large
gatherings along sydney's eastern
beaches
and at byron bay in recent days and
that's led the federal immigration
minister to warn people on temporary
visas
that they will be deported if they're
putting the health of others
at risk political reporter stephanie
boris joins us from parliament house
stephanie
talk us through what the immigration
minister has had to say
well the immigration minister alex hawke
has today warned backpackers so those on
temporary visas
that they could in fact be deported if
they do the wrong thing and don't follow
public health orders now
this warning follows a number of large
gatherings that have occurred
across new south wales one of those
being the big event in bronte on
christmas day
where police were called in to break up
this large gathering
only one person was issued with a court
attendance notice that was
a 25 year old who failed to comply with
the move on order now we don't know if
that 25 year old
is in fact an australian or a backpacker
but the new south wales health minister
brad hazard did come out
after that large gathering saying that a
number of the people at that bronte
event were backpackers and he's urged
them to follow the rules
we also saw some large parties up around
byron bay
local council saying that most of the
people at those events were not in fact
locals and so
as a result of these different big
events going on the immigration minister
alex hawk has spoken today warning
to those people who do the wrong thing
they could have their visas cancelled
and sent home under the migration act
the federal government has powers to
review and cancel visas
for people who are threatening public
health and safety
and visitors to australia need to be
very clear that if they breach public
health orders they are threatening the
health and safety of
australians and the federal government
will look at their visas
now while the immigration minister has
issued this warning today he does say
that most people
are of course following the rules it's
just the minority that are doing the
wrong
thing he has asked the home affairs
department to now work with new south
wales police in the lead up to new
year's
eve once again issuing that warning that
if anything anyone does anything wrong
between now and new year's eve
their visas will be reviewed and despite
issuing this warning to date there's
been
no visa cancellations or deportations
stephanie boris reporting there for us
there live from parliament house
and for more on the sydney outbreak i'm
joined by professor raynor mcintyre head
of global biosecurity
with the university of new south wales
kirby institute professor mcintyre thank
you very much for your time
on abc news can i ask you first do you
have
um any opinion with regards to
the scenes that we saw at bronte beach
and and the efforts by
uh clearly the federal government to now
involve home affairs and
get new south wales police on board i
imagine more as a deterrent
to those kind of big gatherings than
than
anything uh then anything more
yeah it's obviously disappointing to see
large gatherings like that
it's one thing that they are outdoors
because outdoors is less of a risk than
indoors
um how you police large indoor
gatherings is another question i don't
think it's going to be possible to
identify every indoor gathering that's
breaching the rules but i think the
response has been appropriate
what about uh turning to the position of
sydney today and we heard
that uh two eight pm three coronavirus
cases all linked to that avalon cluster
but of more concern now three since that
eight pm reporting time which are
outside of that one in wollongong
and contact tracers are working hard to
try and find
the source of those infections how are
we
traveling in new south wales do you
believe
look i think we're traveling well the
localized lockdowns in the northern
beaches have clearly worked in the sense
that we had
30 cases a day um not you know i think
sunday um 30 cases a day
and not this sunday the previous sunday
and over that week
it's gone down to low single digits so
it's good the numbers going in the right
direction
um i know the premier was talking about
january the 3rd
as a sort of litmus test
but um that's two weeks from christmas
day so i think she's think
looking at the incubation period
following christmas day
to me the bigger worry is the two weeks
after new year's eve so i think
the time to really look out for
do extra testing and enhance the
wastewater surveillance etc will be the
two weeks
the first two weeks of january what do
you think about the current restrictions
that have been put in place
for news new year's eve um 10 people in
your home over greater sydney
and within those that northern beaches
northern zone uh
five people from that zone in your home
and 10 people from
the southern zone if you're in that
southern area
yeah i think the restrictions have been
um
good uh proportionate it
the fact that with the numbers of people
going into the cbd are going to be
vastly reduced
and anyone who does go will be try you
know will have their details
logged somewhere because you need a
permit that's a really good move because
it means that just by reducing the
number of people going in on new year's
eve
you're going to reduce that risk and
you'll be able to track all the people
who do go
um and of course the the other
restrictions will restrict the nut the
size of events in
households across the state um
as well as outdoor gatherings and in
your opinion two weeks after that new
year's eve is the
the key time about when in that
time frame are you most likely to start
to see
symptoms and that might prompt someone
to go and get tested
i think from about the sixth to the
eighth of january is when you'd exp
if there is going to be a surge in cases
that's when you'd expect to see it
um so that's the sort of high risk
period
i think uh it's really great that we
have wastewater surveillance in new
south wales
that's also really important i recall
hearing in the last week that there were
positive wastewater samples in the
hornsby area
and in the central coast be good to
know what's happening with the
wastewater surveillance as well because
that's a really early warning signal of
community transmission
what do you make of the world health
organization that their scientists
are saying that the vaccines being
rolled out
are unlikely to eradicate covert 19
and that travelers will still need to be
quarantining
is is that how do you share that view
two separate issues there one is about
eradication
so eradication is a technical term which
means
the virus does not exist in the world so
i'd have to agree that it's unlikely
that
size cov2 can be eradicated unlike
smallpox which we did eradicate
sars kobe 2 has substantial asymptomatic
transmission
and asymptomatic infection which means
you can't identify every case
and it probably also has an animal host
which small fox didn't so those two
factors
really um mean it's unlikely we'll be
able to eradicate it we can however
with a vaccine that's got high enough
efficacy eliminate it
elimination means stopping sustained
community transmission as we have
achieved elimination with measles
and polio in australia we could feasibly
eliminate
size kobe 2 in australia doesn't mean we
won't have occasional outbreaks but we
won't we'll never have a second wave
like we did in victoria if we achieve
elimination because that is through herd
immunity through vaccination
you need a vaccine that's probably at
least 80 effective in preventing
any infection and high levels of
vaccination in the population
and so quarantining would still be an
aspect of that
um it depends on what vaccine you've had
you know but there's 48 different
vaccines at least in development
at the moment several that are already
rolled out on emergency authorizations
around the world
if you've had a low efficacy vaccine one
that's not as effective in preventing
infection
then you probably do have to undergo the
quarantine
there's no guarantees you don't have the
virus
but if you've had a very high efficacy
vaccine that has high efficacy in
preventing any infection
you may not need quarantine and i think
it'll have to be judged on a
vaccine-by-vaccine basis
and that's what i predict that we'll
have a sort of ranking of vaccines
eventually
by which we'll judge how well protected
somebody is
no vaccine is 100 effective so there's
always a risk of
vaccine failures but someone who's
vaccinated may for example be
able to go into voluntary home
quarantine rather than hotel quarantine
um as an alternative professor rayna
mcintyre do thank you very much for your
time on abc news
it's a pleasure the northern territory
health minister has been providing a
coronavirus update
let's take a listen i'm here today to
provide another update to territorians
around
another positive coronavirus case in the
territory
there is some unusual circumstance
around this case so i'll take the time
to explain to territorians
what exactly has happened and what
precautions are in place
we have had a 25 year old indonesian
national
test positive off a ship a vessel
that came into darwin to receive cattle
for a live cattle export
the individual is now in isolation under
the care of royal darwin hospital and we
wish them well in their recovery
the northern territory at the start of
the coronavirus pandemic
put in place measures noting our
proximity into asia and china
and the travelling time on vessels being
within 14 days
we couldn't rely on that as an
incubation period for the coronavirus
so we have screening processes for the
vessels arriving into the territory
on sunday evening uh the ship arrived
into the port of darwin
uh the initial screening process showed
that one crew member
had identified as being symptomatic in
the past period of time and therefore
was immediately tested for coronavirus
and yesterday that test returned
positive for the 25 year old that i have
just spoken about
it's important for the community to note
that these individuals remained
on board and they didn't have
interactions with the broader darwin
community
there was some port staff that had
interacted with that ship
they were dressed in the appropriate ppe
and keeping contact to a minimum
and i'm advised that they didn't come
into contact with the infectious
individual
but those people are now contacts under
in isolation and have been tested
i'd like to acknowledge our port workers
i have been in touch with the union
over the last 24 hours making sure that
there's been open lines of communication
and those workers are being tested and
as i said those few that had been in
contact with the vessel
are now in isolation following protocols
for infectious disease
so another positive case of covert 19 in
the northern territory bringing our
total to 75
this particular case of an indonesian
national
on board a live cattle ship the ship
hadn't been loaded yet to understand
that the cattle
the supply chain is caring for them so
there's no issues of a ship sitting
around
the remaining crew on the ship a number
have been taken to the howard springs
quarantine facility
where they will remain in 14 days
quarantine unless the vessel leaves
australia earlier
and the remainder of crew are on the
ship
as per international maritime standards
to make sure that that vessel is safe
so the information for territorians
today is a very low risk to the
community
the people had been on the ship they
hadn't been off the ship
and the one person that has tested
positive to date
is being cared for in royals island
hospital
there is only one individual at this
point that has tested positive but of
course
all members of that crew are now close
contacts and are being monitored either
in howard springs or remaining on board
that vessel happy to take any questions
for those who are still on board
so those remaining crew are on the
vessel they're not permitted to leave
the vessel
uh and it is at uh the port of darwin uh
out in the east arnhem region
they're not at an east i'm sorry they're
not coming into contact with uh
territorians
and we'll continue to make sure that
they are monitored but also receive
any care and support that they need with
the appropriate ppe precautions
so it's approximately half of the crew
have gone to quarantine
at howard springs which is the
quarantine facility in the northern
territory
and the other half have remained this is
a large vessel
not not a small ship and so for as i
said maritime safety
we need to have a skeleton staff on that
ship and so that is why
those people have remained uh behind do
we know roughly the numbers how many
have gone to how it springs and how many
remain on the ship
um i'd be happy to provide those off
camera i haven't got the figures to hand
what's the penalty if any of those
people on the ship at the moment are
found reaching
critically um so we have the chief
health officer directions
i think from memory it's direction 51 is
around
maritime and ships entering the northern
territory and as i said
to reassure territorians this is
something that we had considered and put
in place
additional screening measures earlier in
the year
especially considering our proximity
into to asia
and at that time china noting that
southern ports would be more than 14
days
sailing and so someone would become
potentially symptomatic we didn't have
that luxury so we provided
additional screening measures so that we
could ensure the protection and safety
of territorians
absolutely it's the same fines uh five
thousand dollars for an individual
uh if people breach those directions but
we have no indication
uh to date everything uh all crew
members have been compliant
uh as i outlined the one infectious
person who's tested positive is in the
care of royal darwin hospital
in isolation and some of those crew
members have gone to the howard springs
quarantine facility
and other crew members have stayed on
board to maintain that ship safety so
we've certainly had very strong
compliance to date and authorities have
been appropriately engaged whether it's
from health
uh the maritime safety or from police
you mentioned that some
port staff interacted with the ship some
port workers
this includes a pilot that went on to
the ship is that correct
so correct so we have um put in place
precautions uh
throughout the coronavirus pandemic but
there is need from a maritime safety
perspective
uh you have that the pilots who go out
and go on board and guide those vessels
into the port of darwin the pilot of
that vessel
uh the the australian that did perform
that duty is now in isolation because
they are a contact of this person who's
tested positive
i'm advised that they were wearing uh
ppe when they boarded that vessel
and they did not come into contact with
the infectious individual
but of course they have been uh in
contact on that vessel and have become a
contact
uh and are now in isolation and they
have been tested
i also understand that there is what's
referred to as the agent
who meets the vessel at the dock and a
couple of other port workers who
tied off ropes for example they're now
considered contacts and they are in
isolation
we've also made sure that other port
workers are getting tested and it's a
reminder for anyone
if you're not feeling well just because
it's it's the holiday period
the testing centers are open and people
just need to reach out to the pandemic
hotline to make an appointment
considering that the threat of covid was
known on that ship was it an unnecessary
risk putting that pilot in that position
or allowing him or even allowing the
ship to come into darwin port
so i'm not sure where the point around
that copa was known on that ship we know
our proximity into asia we know the
coronavirus pandemic of course
but the pilot guides the ship in and
it's then when the screening process
is is undertaken and that initial
screening process
as i said showed that someone had
answered a question or was unable to
confirm
that they hadn't been feeling well and
thus the tests were performed and how we
got the positive test
do we know if any other crew members are
showing any signs
or symptoms of chronovision so i'm
advised
before before i came out to the media
that those all crew members are well
but we know that the virus just has very
mild symptoms and sometimes people don't
notice them so that's why
we have the crew either in isolation on
the ship or at the howard springs
facility
and that's why of course those other
people have become contacts and are also
in isolation earlier this year there was
a federal
court battle about a foreign flag ship
that came into darwin harbor and was
ordered to leave will this
ship be allowed to stay in
darwin harbour for as long as it needs
to so my understanding is that the
vessel was expecting to be loaded with
those cattle and then head off
our officials will now work with the
owners of the vessel but to reassure
territorians the crew will either remain
uh on board the vessel or at the howard
springs facility
for the minimum of 14 days or until the
vessel chooses to set
sail and we'll work with the authorities
uh we've seen compliance uh
in the last 24 to 48 hours and we have
no reason to
uh not believe that won't continue does
it mean that crew members might be
allowed to
leave quarantine before the 14 days if
the ship does decide to leave
so correct if the ship decided to sail
from the port of darwin back into
international waters
the crew would be escorted from howard
springs onto the ship
and the ship would set sail and of
course we'd make sure community safety
was upheld and that they couldn't change
their mind and thus avoid that
quarantine so
if they choose to stay in australia they
do 14 days quarantine and return those
negative tests
or that the ship can set sail but we'll
allow that for the authorities and the
owners to work through and what's the
process with
uh the man who's in royal darwin
hospital once he is
free of the coronavirus what's the
process for getting him home
so we'll work through that um with
indonesian authorities and also with the
ship
i understand that he remains well he is
in that isolation at royal darwin
hospital
and so we wish him a speedy recovery and
once he is cleared by our health
officials
he can either rejoin his crew members or
arrangements will be made for him to get
home you mentioned the port staff
are in isolation are they in home
isolation or in
howard springs so the crew mem the port
workers
and i understand there was just a
handful that are the contacts
as for as per protocols they're in
isolation
at home having been tested and so
people need to understand the contact
tracing processes
so those people have been considered to
be a contact even though we know they're
wearing ppe
and we know they didn't come into direct
contact having an ever precautious
approach
they're now considered contacts and
therefore in isolation and will get
tested
and we'll continue to listen to the
health advice around what's best for
them and they haven't visited any other
venues
between boarding that ship
and going home to self-isolation so of
course
there is a time lag in the sense that
the vessel arrived on sunday evening
and they undertook their work as they
have been doing for many months
and then they would have been free to to
do what they want i don't know what
they have done in between finishing work
and becoming aware that they're a
contact of someone with coronavirus
as soon as they become aware they must
go into isolation
and undertake that test if they were to
test positive which is a very low chance
then there would be another layer of
contact tracing as we see
with the pandemic do you know exactly
i'll just go matt
across tonight do we know exactly what
time the ship arrived on sunday because
there are some online websites that
track these ships movements that suggest
that ship arrived
on sunday morning as opposed to sunday
evening do you have more detail on that
uh
so the advice i've got is that the the
ship arrived on sunday
uh evening and that the initial
screening process took place and it was
at that point
that this individual didn't pass those
requirements and therefore
um the next level of um in terms of
health professionals uh boarded the
vessel to undertake that test
uh and then that test result came back
yesterday afternoon being monday
obviously with the idea that we have to
keep the export industry propped up does
it concern you to a level
that we are continuing to let foreign
flag vessels into our harbour
people have to understand that these
vessels not only
do they bring goods that australians
need these are vital supply chain
vessels so
they're ensuring and we know that we've
seen a huge impact
to transportation from the coronavirus
pandemic
but these ensure that we receive those
vital goods both into australia and
exiting and as i said the government
made sure and the northern territory
government put in an
added layer of screening uh early on in
the pandemic to keep territorians safe
does it need to be strengthened are they
doing their job the process has worked
the process identified from that initial
screening
uh that there was some concern and that
test was undertaken
so we of course will review any
situation
and see if there's any changes we need
to make but the system has worked and
we've seen hundreds of ships over the
past few months
during the pandemic that have provided
those vital goods into australia and
allowed for exports to continue
whilst at the same time keeping people
safe just on sydney there have been more
mystery cases
in that city will the nt's hot spots
be reappraised so i just spoke to the
chief health officer before i came down
here to speak to the media
we are heading into he's got ahpbc and
then we'll head back into another
cabinet meeting
to decide if any changes need to be made
based on the latest advice so
even though it has been at the christmas
period we've been in constant contact
with our health officials
and those health officials have been in
constant contact with interstate
officials
sorry you said that meeting was today so
the chief health officer is as i
understand
uh participating in ahpc right now uh he
had had some initial information from
the new south wales authorities
will be briefed following this press
conference and if any changes to the
northern territories hotspot policy
need to be made of course they will be
and we'll update the community
but it's a reminder for people domestic
travel is not what it used to be
we as you've seen have not hesitated to
call hot spots whether it's late into
the evening
whether it's on a sunday afternoon uh
people do need to be cautious when they
travel
um one of the new cases is it
likely or possible that the illawarra
hotspot will be reinstated
i can't preempt anything i need to get
that information from hugh heggy
he will brief the emergency cabinet
members and a decision will be made
but it's not just looking at the cases
it's looking at the information behind
those cases
we know that sydney's been aware of this
outbreak for
coming on two weeks now so it may be
that these individuals were in isolation
so we need to look at what level of
threat there is to the community and
potentially the territory before we make
any decisions
some aboriginal health groups criticize
the government for
maybe acting through prematurely or that
sydney
why would be the first jurisdiction
without all the others that
did impose restrictions to remove them
so quickly
so we have a hotspots policy which
throughout the pandemic has been agile
it has allowed us to try and get on with
life as much as possible but kept
territorians safe and kept our
communities safe
our community medical organisations our
aboriginal medical organizations
they participate in the public health
advisory group
and so there's certainly flows of
information we hear those concerns but
decisions are based
based on the advice from the chief
health officer and to dates kept
territorians safe
can you give us an update on the
situation
so over the the christmas period um i
was advised
from health and spoke with the police
minister who'd also been advised from
police
that um there had been allegedly some
break-ins which had targeted health
staff
police and health on the ground work
together to ensure the safety of those
nurses providing
care into the community but also
ensuring their safety
and that services could continue so i
understand that the incidents are being
investigated by police
but i have been as i said uh briefed by
health and was in contact with
both health and the police minister over
the weekend
and that was an update there from the
northern territory health minister
natasha files
a 25 year old indonesian national on the
live
cattle export ship the diamond tina has
been confirmed
as having coronavirus and he's now being
cared for
in royal darwin hospital some of the
crew are now
at howard springs quarantine center and
some remain on the ship now
they will be there for a minimum of 14
days
unless the owners of that ship decide to
leave darwin now reportedly at this
stage
all the other crew members are well the
port staff that came into contact with
the ship which includes
a pilot that boarded the vessel they're
now in isolation
and this case brings the northern
territory total to 75
cases of coronavirus throughout the
pandemic
queensland police have confirmed that a
fourth border checkpoint will be opened
on the gold coast
it will be set up on miles street at
coolangatta
to help reduce the lengthy wait times
chief superintendent mark wheeler says
police have already issued
a number of fines well this has been a
really mammoth and complex task
already we have over 543.000 declaration
passes in the system
and that tells us a lot of people want
to come into queensland now we've also
unfortunately since we've been operating
just over a week we've had to turn
around 300 vehicles
containing over 700 people and in
and amongst that we've had to issue ten
infringement notices for four thousand
three dollars
uh predominantly for people who provided
false information
now that includes uh about a day and a
half ago five people who came directly
from the greater sydney hotspot now they
will allege they made a false
declaration that they had not been in a
hot spot
in that previous 14 days we had reason
to
check on the veracity of what they'd
been telling us we located them later
that day in a surface paradise unit
and we subsequently issued those fines
to three women and two men
uh those people were directed into uh
self-funded quarantine
in a government mandated hotel so it's
been a very expensive
uh journey for those people and i think
it serves as a warning that if you're
going to come into queensland
from a hot spot and try and game the
system
even if you think you've gotten through
you should not rest easy because police
will still be
following up any information that we
receive
[Music]
[Applause]
the top stories on abc news three new
cases of covert 19 were detected in new
south wales
in the 24 hours to 8 pm last night all
of those were directly linked to the
avalon cluster
three additional cases were detected
after the apm deadline
one from wollongong one from sydney's
inner west and one from the northern
suburbs of sydney
all three cases are under investigation
to determine the source of infection
anyone with symptoms is urged to get
tested immediately
the immigration minister has pledged to
identify temporary visa holders
involved in breaching coronavirus
restrictions for potential deportation
alex hawke says he was shocked by the
scenes of crowds at sydney's bronte
beach on christmas day
and that the migration act allows him to
cancel or revoke the visa of anyone
threatening
public health a major five-year study of
the atlantic ocean has discovered 12
previously unknown species using
remote-controlled deep-sea robots
the project studied the ocean and its
hidden ecosystems in
unprecedented detail it also found that
life in the deep ocean
is under threat from climate change and
australia's hopes of winning the boxing
day test lay solely with the bowlers
after being dismissed for 200 in their
second innings
india needs 69 runs to win with
australia's only cause for optimism
being the tourists were bowled out 436
in the second innings of the first test
more now on the coronavirus outbreak in
new south wales and contact traces
are trying to determine the source of
three new infections
outside of the northern beaches area the
cases were picked up after yesterday's
reporting period had finished
we had over 16 000 people come forward
and get
tested but we're really keen to elevate
those testing numbers overnight to 8 pm
we had three cases all of which are
directly linked
to the avalon cluster all of which are
already in isolation
uh which is positive news however
overnight since
8 p.m we have had a couple of cases
where
we haven't yet established those links
to the avalon cluster they're cases
outside
of the northern beaches one of which is
from wollongong
so i'm not ruling out that they're
somehow not linked to the avalon cluster
that case from wollongong had been in
sydney
however until those links are
established all of us in greater sydney
have to be on high alert including
residents of wollongong so i say that
in order to encourage as many people as
possible across the state
even if you live in the regions even if
you live in greater sydney if you have
the mildest of symptoms please come
forward and get tested
because we know how contagious this
virus is
and now that we've had a couple of cases
come in since 8 pm
outside of the northern beaches that's
always a cause for concern
and validates the advice the health
experts have given have been giving
government
the federal immigration minister alex
hawk is warning backpackers their visas
could be cancelled
if they break covert 19 rules it comes
after police were called to break up a
large
christmas gathering along sydney's
eastern beaches and
at byron bay under the migration act the
federal government has powers to review
and cancel
visas for people who are threatening
public health and safety
and visitors to australia need to be
very clear that if they breach public
health orders they are threatening the
health and safety of australians
and the federal government will look at
their visas i understand like many
others you were disturbed by the
pictures
of the gathering at bronte beach on
christmas day
talk us through these actions that
you're taking now are they exceptional
or are you really enforcing what's
already there
well like all australians i think 10
months into this pandemic
we're quite shocked to see people have
been here a while now
who've seen the situation around the
world who understand the the state of
the world and what we're in
breaching public health orders when we
have an outbreak in sydney
and we want to thank the people on the
northern beaches the australians who are
doing the right thing
most australians are doing the right
thing most temporary visa holders are
doing the right thing
but there is a small number of visa
holders who are doing the wrong thing
and 10 months into this pandemic that is
unacceptable
so asked the department of home affairs
to bring forward
any cases working with the new south
wales police and new south wales
agencies
that they're aware of of people who've
breached their visa conditions
and we will examine those visas and we
will cancel them where necessary
are you going to be looking in
particular at the incident that happened
on christmas day or is this a warning
for anything that might happen over the
new year period
well in the lead up to new years it'll
be absolutely clear
you must obey the public health orders
if you're a temporary visa holder
you're a guest in australia and we know
most temporary visa holders
do obey the public health orders but for
that small group that think that they
can breach them
and get away with it we have asked our
agencies to look into it we will ask
them to work with new south wales
officials and
if we become aware that you've breached
a public health order we will look at
your visa conditions very very carefully
and
you are subject to cancellation so again
we urge people to do the right thing we
don't want to be canceling visas in fact
most temporary visa holders have done
the right thing however if these
people continue to do the wrong thing
and breach public health orders
we will take action with our powers
under the migration act so
will police be reviewing that footage
then of bronte beach
that incident or going back over their
records from that and passing that on to
home affairs
well i've asked the department of home
affairs to work with the new south wales
police and state
agencies and they will do that and again
we if we become aware
of people who have breached their visa
conditions and threatened the public
health and safety of others
we will take action under the migration
act and i think people expect us
to do that 10 months into this pandemic
people understand
what is happening people understand what
we need to be doing we've done so well
as a country
we're urging people to do the right
things for people that don't now
when they know the rules and they
understand what's at stake
that is a threat to public health and
safety we know that
airlines aren't operating at their full
capacity
if someone was identified i guess how
about
how does this deportation process come
given the the current state and wouldn't
it be better perhaps to have
increased fines for uh temporary visa
holders
well there are plenty of options in
terms of conditions and dealing with
people on temporary visas
we have routinely continued to deport
people throughout the pandemic and
that's a function of the federal
government
we'll keep doing that where necessary
but again if people do the right thing
there'll be no need for this
and people just need to remember if
you're a temporary visa holder if you're
a guest in australia
you must obey the public health order
it's pretty simple
and i think people will get that message
pretty clearly but for those that don't
the small minority that think that they
are
above the system of course we have the
power to cancel your visa
and we'll consider that very carefully
if we become aware that you've breached
your visa conditions
have there been people deported during
the pandemic
that have breached covert restrictions
yet
well people are routinely deported for
all sorts of things if you
breach your visa conditions if you are a
criminal of course we have criminal
deportations
and we do have the power to cancel visas
under under the covert
requirements with the breaching public
health and safety of australians
so we will do that and we will act where
necessary and
i mean this does seem to be an issue
that
is is a concern in that eastern suburbs
area where there are a lot of
backpackers temporary visa holders
up uh towards byron bay again um
they're kind of seen as the party
central for young people who
are in australia and uh traveling around
um have measures been uh put in place to
try and get the message
to those young people about the
restrictions that exist here
in australia at the moment
well certainly we've got uh temporary
visa holders and guests
all around australia and most of them i
want to stress again have been really
good
in the last 10 months and they've abided
by their visa conditions
they've been working harder they've been
studying or they've continued
to do the right thing we do have a small
group of people who are breaching
their conditions certainly in sydney
there we have seen some breaches
recently
and in other places 10 months in i think
australians expect
that their government will act and we
will act if people continue to breach
their conditions and risk public health
and safety
and we couldn't be more clear about that
the message is clear
people know there's a pandemic on they
know that in their home countries many
of them are in a
worse state than australia and they know
that here the hard work and sacrifice of
australians and our guests
has meant we're in a good position for
new years where people can celebrate at
home
with small groups of guests inside the
public health orders
so please just do that and if you do the
right thing you have nothing to worry
about but if people continue to breach
their visa conditions the federal
government will have no choice but to
act
immigration minister alex hawk i do
thank you very much for joining us on
abc news
thanks elena let's check on the finance
news now david
chow has joined me at the desk and david
it is the final trading week for 2020.
it's it really is quite hard to believe
so how is the market looking today
well this morning the market was off to
a strong start but did lose some
momentum but i'd say the performance
right now is still
quite decent now this is the last week
as you said and it's very quiet
i mean if we take the average of how
many trades happened in the past 30 days
today's activity is about a tenth of
that that's how quite we're talking so
the aussie market's basically following
what's happening overseas
especially wall street wall street hit
record highs after us president donald
trump
signed a trillion dollar stimulus bill
and backed down on his threat
to veto the bill so the market took that
as good news and on top of that the
european union unanimously
approved the post brexit trade deal the
uk so that's
one less thing for the global economy to
worry about so how does that translate
for the aussie market
well here's how it looks 8 out of every
10 stocks are trading higher as you can
see so stocks
that have been hardest hit during the
pandemic are making a rebound so that
includes
travel companies like flight center and
web jet as well as
a2 milk which recently announced a
profit downgrade
because of its reduced sales to china
and that by now pay later craze is back
with afterpay jumping to near record
highs
and on the flip side grain corp and viva
energy aren't doing so well today
so the all odds in the asx 200 up by
about half a percent with
almost every sector posting gains so the
asx is
marginally higher than where it was on
january the 1st before the pandemic
sell-off so there's a lot of optimism
out there still
so let's take a look at that bigger
picture and see how it looks